I'm Wesley Morris and this is Cannonball
Today. Bonito.
Bonito.
Even before Bad Buddy got on stage to
the Super Bowl, I was actually thinking
about the role of protest art in this
particular moment. I think a lot of it
has been afraid to take things on to be
explicit about what is being protested
or that there is even a protest
occurring at all in some of this work.
And I think I think that's why there was
so much suspense, anticipation,
excitement, fear. Will he or won't he in
the leadup to Bad Bunny's performance?
On the one hand, how could the maybe the
most famous Puerto Rican on earth, one
of the biggest singers, musicians on
earth, not go there?
>> I don't know.
>> On the other hand, it's the Super Bowl
and this thing is speaking to a huge
American audience that is just that
claims it's just here to watch some
football.
>> Yay! Super Bowl touchdown.
>> And you know, they don't want to be told
how to feel about important things.
Well, he did it and I think people are
in the wake of what he did. Some people
are a little confused. Like, was what he
did a protest or not? So, I asked my
friend Sasha Weiss to come back on the
show so we could think through I mean,
what really did happen? What did he do?
And then we're going to talk about
protest music more broadly. the like um
punch you in the face kind of songs and
then you know the more subtle ones. I'm
not going to be subtle now because here
comes the cannonball.
>> Hi Sasha.
>> Hi Wesley.
>> Um okay so is what happened on Sunday
was it an act of protest? Did we just
watch Bad Bunny just run around and say,
"Oh, go away, Ice.
Get out of here." I think it it was an
act of protest, but I think it was a
nimble and in some ways totally overt
one and in some ways actually a really
subtle one. And I think if it was an act
of protest,
it was kind of protest in the form of
invitation
>> into my worldview, into my way of doing
things,
>> into a kind of humanism
>> that is counterprogramming.
>> I, you know, I think that inherently
all that you, you were correct. I mean,
I think that I loved the shrinking of
the field to just some sugar cane.
>> A extremely powerful historical
swath of greenery.
>> Yes.
>> Yes. People, your sugar starts in a
field. And for a long time, people were
not paid money to harvest it. Some of
the descendants of those people were on
that football field for 13 minutes.
>> Yes. And he's definitely evoking that
historical violence that is still very
much with him.
>> Well, he has the guys in the beach comr
hats actually doing the work,
>> right? He's having
>> something is being explicitly evoked
here.
>> He's having America confront that. But
then he really turns it and something
else happens. The mood shifts.
>> Time shifts in a in a sense if I'm right
about what we're actually witnessing
here. And
>> a party starts.
>> Right. Right.
>> And it's a neighborhood party. And it's
a party with a lot of specificity.
Suddenly, you're in a very specific
place with kind of signifiers that are
also familiar to New Yorkers, by the
way. Right. There's a bodega with an EBT
sign. There are food carts and and a
bar.
>> Yes. Yes.
>> And he's kind of a maestro this scene. I
I really thought about musical theater.
I was like, this is this is Lin Manuel
Miranda's in the Heights.
>> I mean, immediately we are in a we are
in a place. We are in a mood and that
mood is
fellowship. It is joy.
>> And to be among and inside this culture
and like something is being shared with
us. Yeah.
>> By invitation, right? By invitation. And
I, you know, it's funny you mentioned
Lyn Manuel Miranda.
Do you know what I was thinking about?
>> What were you thinking about?
>> I was thinking about Sesame Street.
>> I love that. There's a kind of
directness
that
is really important for how messages get
put across on that show.
>> I always think of Sesame Street as being
outside. It's a completely alresco
>> experience,
>> education, cultural, entertainment
experience. And part of the of the way
that we learn is by a kind of direct
transfer transference of
not the ABCs or like how to count but
just you personhood and seeing that
there are many different people in a
place sharing spaces sharing
>> also the intergenerational nature of who
was on stage. I mean, you don't that
often see a Super Bowl halftime show
where there are a bunch of old people on
stage and a bunch of kids on stage.
>> Old musicians.
>> Old dancers. Older dancers.
>> Yeah.
>> Um
>> an old an older woman serving him the
drink. Yeah.
>> Like these are the people in my
neighborhood. There's there's a kind of,
you know, there's there's a breadth and
there's a a generational exchange that's
happening. You can also learn from these
other people.
>> It's interesting to think about the
environment in which this performance
takes place. Yes,
>> I mean there is there is a protest
element obviously coursing through it.
The fact of it is protest
>> but I think it actually is
counterprotest
right because I think you know we're
living under a government that is
protesting a reality in order to
construct an alternative reality
>> and this performance to me was a protest
a counterprotest to that protest.
>> Yes. and the reality that it's
constructing has a cultural specificity,
um, a kind of deep musical history, the
deep history of a place and an and an
intimacy. I mean, it's kind of
incredible the intimacy. I mean, it's
like even just thinking about
>> theater, right? Musical theater happens
in a small space, a relatively small
space. He creates a small space within
this huge hyperamerican space that is
very particular. It's his reality and
he's inviting us inside of that. There's
a moment that I really really loved in
this performance where
>> he whispers.
>> I loved that.
>> You know,
>> um he and it's actually the moment where
he's introducing himself to us.
>> He doesn't call himself Bad Bunny. No, I
mean the great thing about this whole
performance to me is that it is
presented by
one Benonito Antonio Martinez Okasio.
Bad Bunny
>> given name,
>> right? He he's an idea. Bad Bunny. Bad
Bunny is like a like a concept now. And
this show is you are being invited into
Bonito's house.
>> Yes. The camera closes in on him in
closeup.
He's on the spikely uh tracking device.
He's riding the dolly.
>> And he and he and he whispers, you know,
and and he's saying I mean what he's
saying in Spanish is I'm here because I
never stop believing in myself, right?
>> And you also should never stop believing
in yourself. Trust me. the look on his
face as he said his as he says it too.
It's just like the kind of clarity in
his face. I don't know. I think he's
simultaneously really aware
of what it means to to be in San
Francisco doing the halftime show. He
knows that people are like asking
Donald Trump and Mike Johnson. I didn't
even know who Bad Bunny was, but it
sounds like a terrible decision uh in my
view from what I'm hearing.
>> You know what the politicians
are saying about the show, the fact that
it was going to be, it was rumored, but
in all likelihood going to be conducted
entirely in Spanish.
>> Sure. But it's the way that he's
thinking through and presenting
an opportunity for whoever is skeptical
about what it is he's going to do to be
disarmed.
>> Exactly.
>> Like I mean, and this is what I love
about that moment because he's just like
come with me and like
step into my house. I mean, he, you
know, he has literally,
you know, he's saying come in and not
saying this isn't for you. He's saying
this is for you and it's for me. It's,
you know, come on in.
>> It's everybody's. It's everybody's. And
also, it doesn't have to be alienating
that you don't know every word.
>> Yes.
>> Um, just look, just look, let the
production tell you what is going on
here. What is, what are we afraid of
here? And the other thing about Benito
that I admire and he always has this
quality, but it really was on display
here.
>> He's like, I dare you of accusing me of
staging a protest. Like I am hosting a
party here.
>> Yeah.
>> And he has such a kind of nonchalant
>> um unbothered
>> air about him.
>> He is unstressed. He is he's not that
even that excitable, you know. He's kind
of um moving through this
>> not in this mode of himself, not in this
mode of himself.
>> Not in this mode of himself with this
kind of um ease and grace and modeling
that kind of ease and grace. And like in
that way to me it's like a very
subversive form of protest, right? It's
it's a protest that recognizes these
encroaching forces and is not really
going to acknowledge them
>> because
he's built a different kind of world.
But I feel like the production here
takes real advantage of this being a
duskoriented
or dusk hour halftime show.
>> And to me, all of the joyousness and
Sesame Street and In the Heights, all
>> inclusivity and invitation and
>> Lady Gaga being the wedding singer at an
actual wedding because two people get
married during this show.
then like there's a shift.
>> Yeah.
>> And some of it is that you notice that
the sun is setting and so with the with
the light changing is sort of
ingeniously produced. There are these
like strobe lights that start going off
during Elapagon,
>> which is a song about the blackout in
Puerto Rico and kind of noting the
conditions that I mean there's a party
in that song too, but he is he is
talking about the neglect and the
mismanagement of the post hurricane
Maria world of Puerto Rico.
>> And then suddenly you see these dancers
who are the same who are dressed the
same as the sugarcane guys, right? The
guys with the machetes hacking the
sugarcane. They're up on these utility
poles climbing up, getting shot, fall,
like, you know, bungeeing down, then
climbing back up and having the same
thing happen again. And there is like a
shock effect happening with that strobe.
I don't know. I mean, the energy kind of
changes.
>> Yeah.
>> It gets it literally it's literally
getting darker, but also the performance
sort of takes a
>> a turn into a kind of darkness.
>> Yeah. um
>> and maybe into a more overt form of
protest. I mean, at the end of the
performance, something happens.
>> So, the stakes to me like I mean, and
some of this could just be what we're
bringing to this event. This was also
part of the of the situation, but
there's this exuberant moment like as
the flags are coming toward the I don't
know exactly where he's going the tunnel
where he's going to like go back to his
locker room, but there's a look of
urgency on some of what I would describe
as the security people's faces. I don't
know if they're bodyguards. I they're
suited people. And there's a
photographer there snapping pictures and
he bumps into the camera almost. But as
he's saying Masotos, he's like ripping
out his earpiece. This is something he
could have done in in quote his locker
room unquote, but like
>> he does it there. So it just creates
this urgency like he is being censored
in some way or like he's got to get off
or being threatened or you know like
like I had a moment watching it where I
was like is something going on
>> and then it ends right you go right to
that wide shot of the stadium
>> and so it did sort of then like
politicize him in some way like he
actually was taking a risk. this show
was a risk
>> and like I didn't I didn't perform that
for the you know for most of my 13
minutes but in these final seconds I'm
going to exit with a kind of urgency
that suggests that there had been a risk
>> that there had been some kind of danger
or that there is danger and and and and
where the edges of his very carefully
constructed world suddenly bleed out
into the outside world
>> right
>> or the outside world encroaches on that
world and it's real. There's some way in
which he's letting
a suggestion of current events, a
suggestion of danger, a suggestion of
like maybe you're not going to get out
of here unscathed
enter in a way that feels like all the
more powerful.
>> It's chilling
>> for for for not having been kind of
admitted into the the main event.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I mean, for many people not
being admitted into the main event.
>> Exactly.
It's crazy cuz we just had this whole
Bad Buddy conversation about his Super
Bowl halftime show and you and I had
already been thinking because we knew we
suspected
that he would do something interesting
or like just the fact of him at the
Super Bowl halftime show doing it is a
form of protest.
>> Yes. Yes. So it got us thinking about
like why is Bad Bunny the only person
doing this work?
>> Where are the protest songs?
>> Where are the protest songs? So what
happened?
>> It came down like Mana from the heavens.
>> Bruce Springsteen.
>> Bruce Springsteen. The very night we
were asking where's the
>> Where are the protest songs?
>> The came through
>> writes a song called Streets in
Minneapolis and releases it. What did he
say?
>> So, I wrote this song and I uh recorded
the next day,
>> got mad on Wednesday, wrote on Thursday,
>> recorded on recorded on Friday, released
on Saturday.
>> Here we go.
>> Yes. And the song has that quality of
hot off the presses.
>> I don't even think he drank a glass of
water to sing it.
>> Well, let's like get into why it works
as a protest song. M um I think it's the
thing that you identified. One thing is
that it's it's a it feels like it just
leapt out of his heart.
>> Yes.
>> Right.
>> Um
>> it's a beautiful way of putting it.
>> This song has I mean you know I have the
lyrics with me. King
>> the third verse. King Trump. I love
>> Well, start with Nichollet Avenue,
right? Nichollet Avenue.
>> He is he is putting us in a place.
>> Yeah.
>> He is like you know through the winter's
ice and cold. So automatically here we
are
>> place and time
>> through the winter's ice and cold down
Nichollet Avenue. A city of flame fought
fire and ice
>> neath an occupier's boots. I mean all
right but
>> should we like listen to the first
>> All right, let's just listen. Let's
listen to it.
>> Like to listen to it.
>> All right, let's see.
came to Minneapolis to enforce the law,
or so their story goes.
>> Like, it's a it's a really vintage Bruce
>> kind of
passionate utterance and insinuation and
and a kind of snarl. I mean, you really
feel his anger the way he sings that
line. Here in our home they killed and
roamed in the winter of 26.
We'll remember the names of those who
died on the streets of Minneapolis.
>> I like the refrain I like in the winter
of 26. Like
>> oh
>> talk to me about that.
>> Well protest songs are keepers of the
record. protest songs are analogous to
what we do, right? Like they're works of
journalism, but also
>> it's it's a marking for the future,
right? Like like kind of giving it this
sort of grand it's a time stamp, but
it's also like imagining a future when
we look back on the winner of 26 and
name it and remember it. And it's
challenging us to remember it, you know?
>> You know what's crazy? Every time I hear
that lyric, I'm like, what happened in
1926?
What happened in 26? Oh [__] we are now
in a period that folk songs are going to
be written. Exactly. Exactly. Exactly.
Like the way that it the way that it's
like a palum fest of the past and the
now and the future, you know. That's
what I I think good protest songs often
have that quality that they're kind of
like squishing time al together.
>> But this song was the first song I have
ever heard where I was like,
>> "What year are we in?"
And also like it's something that you I
also like the kind of high lyricism
>> and there were bloody footprints
where mercy should
>> bloody footprints where mercy should
have stood. You know there's a kind of
um you know folky poetic high register
but then he's also naming names.
>> He is naming names. They're all in here
names. It's our blood and bones and
these whistles and phones against Miller
and Gnome's dirty lies.
>> He's calling out Steven Miller and
Christy Gnome and he's, you know, he's
he's writing history, right?
>> Trump's federal thugs beat up on his
face and his chest. Then we heard the
gunshots
and Alex pretty lay in the snow.
>> This is all This is all urgency.
>> Yeah.
>> This is all like shooting out of him.
remember the names of those who died
>> on the streets of M.
But you know the thing about this song
that's also interesting
to think through as I listen to it is
just what is making it effective.
>> Right? It's the details, the anger, the
specificity, the timing, and it it
cannot be afraid. It has to be there's
no there is very little simile or
metaphor in this song. It is just
>> it's very direct. It's a bulletin.
>> It's very direct.
>> But it also is like who is the song to?
Like who that's another thing about
protest songs. They're they're an
address.
>> Yes, they're an address. um they're
either an address to the protesters or
they're an address to the authorities.
But this to me has a very kind of town
crier.
>> I feel like it's an address to the
American people.
>> Everybody else. Everybody else.
>> I feel like it I also feel like it's a
letter to the future, right? Like I I
mean I feel like it's it's a kind of
like
>> this is an inflection point.
>> How do you want to be remembered? How do
you want to be seen right from the
vantage point of a future where the
winner of 26 is far away?
>> How do you want to be remembered? And I
and I think it's a kind of challenge.
I'm curious when you think about your
cannon of protest songs. I mean, you
know a lot about protest songs. Like
where does this fit and like what is the
role of directness in a protest song?
What's the importance of directness in a
protest song for you? I mean, a protest
song should be willing to break your
nose.
Like, punch me in the face, do it.
>> Uh, but it they didn't always start that
way. Yeah.
>> I mean, we can start
>> with, you know, spirituals, right? Swing
low
speed chariot
come in
>> the church. And that was music that was
written to get, you know, enslaved
people, for instance, um I mean enslaved
people period
through
through life, through daily life. Yeah.
And some of it was was was was offered
as
it was an it was a promise that like
whatever is happening here on this
terrestrial situation there is something
better waiting for you up there
>> right
>> you know the the most interesting thing
to me about a song like we shall
overcome and so it's a protest against
condition right the ethos of the
spiritual kind of makes its way into
you know more modern ideas of protest
music, right? Things that people can
sing while they march,
>> you know, like a a civil rights a song
that was used as a as an as an anthem, a
a source of like real communal
congealment uh during the civil rights
movement. Like the great note in that
song is someday, you know,
And like depending on who's singing it,
they will sing the [__] out of that
someday.
>> Especially when it's a group of people
like you people who can sing. Oh my god,
it just gets chills cuz that someday can
go up. It mostly goes up, but I've heard
it go down sometimes and that is also
chilling.
But then sometimes you got to get
punched in the nose.
And one of my favorite nose punches is
Stevie Wonder just doing a song that's
so punch you in the nose. It's called
It's Wrong Apartheid
just in Minneapolis. That could be about
the ice cream shop on the corner of
Nichollet Avenue.
There's no mistaking.
>> There's no mistaking a part tight. It's
wrong.
>> Satan's
come to you at last.
>> And this is a almost seven minute song
that is just him enumerating the ways in
which apartheid is wrong. At this point,
Mandela is in prison and
there's real it is the beginning of a
real discussion about this event
happening in South Africa as being like
a human rights catastrophe.
>> Like the chorus of the song is
like slavery was wrong,
like the Holocaust was wrong, apartheid
is wrong. And then he's got these um
Isaiah
background singers like accompanying
him. So it's a call in response. It's
wrong.
Wrong.
>> By the way, all my South African homies,
don't come at me. I'm doing my best. But
basically, it just means like there's
nothing more to say. That's what the the
ka there is doing. It's only the word is
only or just. But here in this song,
it's like
>> there is nothing more to say. It is
wrong. Mh.
>> It's interesting cuz I think that
Streets of Minneapolis is
I think the the place that it like flies
out of Bruce Springsteen, the thing that
induces its its flight is that the state
is denying a thing that he saw with his
own eyes. Right. Right.
>> And I think this song is providing
>> a musical index, right? that this thing
is true versus the Stevie Wonder song
which also is an interesting index
because he actually isn't that specific
right
this
>> well he's specific about the morality
>> right the morality but that is an
abstract enough concept that it can be
applied to any apartheid
>> right apartheid isn't isn't just a thing
that happened in South Africa you could
you could take this to Gaza right now
you could play this on the streets in
Gaza all over town and people would get
it. But this is a song you could take to
all kinds of places.
>> It gets to the function of of protest
songs as a kind of tool, right? Like
like Bruce is kind of entering something
into the archives.
>> Maybe someone will take it home.
>> Yeah, I like that. Oh, I love that. I
love that.
>> But Stevie is actually giving us
something to to live with and maybe to
use.
>> This is This is timeless. This is
timeless. And I'm I'm really interested
in in protest songs. I mean, when we
started to talk about this, like the
songs that I started to think about,
actually, none of them are actually
overt protest songs.
>> Oh, that's a whole other thing.
>> But they but they they share in this
quality of giving us something to think
with and to live with. And I feel like
that's a really important function of
protest songs in American life that
>> like
>> they can prepare you for the long
struggle and they can do interior work
and kind of put you in a
a mindset to
>> withstand you know which takes us back
to their roots in as you were saying you
know in in churches in um times of
enslavement. I mean, I think that's the
deep root of protest music in this
country, which is about how you how you
get through, right? How you endure.
>> I mean, I'm so interested in the songs
that do that.
>> Yeah. To use a gospel concept like how
you get over
>> how you get over
>> how you get from one side to the other
side.
>> Can I share a song with you that I've
been thinking about? I've been thinking
about I mean, it is a classic protest
song, but it's also not a protest song.
It's Feeling Good as rendered by Miss
Nina Simone. So she did not write this
song, right?
>> It had been around in the culture for a
couple of years.
>> She's written other protest songs.
>> She's written other protest songs, but
this is not one.
>> It was covered by Colt Train. It was
covered by Sammy Davis Jr. But it was
when Nina Simone sang it and recorded it
in 1965 that it really started to take
on its life.
>> Yeah. No, I mean the 65 like this is a
hugely turbulent year in the civil
rights movement. This is I mean Edmund
Pettis Bridge, you know, Selma's
happening essentially. We're talking
about like getting a voting rights act
passed into law.
>> The end of the story is yet to be
>> right. It's unfolding.
>> It's unfolding.
>> And so you're in the middle of of a lot
of death, violence,
uncertainty, but also hope, right?
There's a belief that that something
something good is out there somewhere
and like we are fighting and dying to
achieve it and realize it.
>> But there's something in the way she
sings the song. I mean the beginning of
the song is ac cappella.
>> Yes.
>> I think there's a kind of like interior
logic happening like
>> yes
>> can I feel it? You know I mean at the
end of the song she says I know how I
feel. Right. The beginning of the song
she's saying you know how I feel. Right.
She's working her way into the feeling
of freedom that she's talking about. And
I think it's really important that she
starts
>> down here. Let's listen to it. Talk
about it.
>> All right. I mean, I'm not going to say
no to listening to Feeling Good.
>> It's a new
day.
It's a new life for me. Yeah. It's a new
>> Yeah. It's like she's going in. She's
>> It's blue. It's blue. It's blue.
>> It's really blue.
>> And I'm feeling good.
Is she feeling good?
>> I mean, these horns say no. Honestly,
>> she's talking to herself. You know, at
least at first, she's she's kind of
bringing
she's speaking a feeling into being. You
know, she's having to urge herself on
here. And then the music comes in and
then I think the song gets more
declarative and she's owning it more.
>> The strings show up, right?
It's a new day.
>> And the strings are kind of like pulling
her up with them, right?
>> Cuz the, you know,
>> into the sky.
>> To me, this is an existential protest
song, right? Like,
>> sure.
>> What What does it take to inhabit this
song? And she's convincing herself to
inhabit the song while she's singing it,
you know? She's she's bringing a new
reality into being within herself while
also like really acknowledging with her
voice with her kind of hesitancy with
her walking into the song like the
undertoe of the harsh reality that she
lives with. Right. But she she
vanquishes it through the course of the
song.
>> Yes.
>> And listen to this final exhalation of
feeling good.
>> Feeling
good.
It's so triumphant and sorrowful at the
same time. So, it's funny to think of it
as a protest song because in a way, it's
so personal, right? And and the trip she
goes on in this song is so personal.
But, but to me, I think that there are
protest songs that really do function
for the Wii and for all Americans. And I
feel like this song is like inviting us
to do like whatever work we have to do
inside to kind of get ourselves ready.
>> Yeah. I think the protest I mean we're
still talking about modes of address,
right? Like which person the Stevie
Wonder song is addressed to the racists,
right? Like this is for all the people
who don't think this is a problem.
Enough with the not saying of the thing.
>> I'm saying it. saying it. And then
there's what she's doing, what Nina
Simone is doing in this song, and it's
just
I'm addressing myself. This song is me
talking to me.
>> Yeah.
>> And
you can hear, dear listener, what you
want. You can make this song be you
talking to you, too, right? You can take
what you're hearing and go out and like
start your day. Whatever it is that you
need to feel, you need to work yourself
into feeling good about this is for you.
>> That was so beautiful. And actually, in
a funny way, takes me back to the part
of our conversation that was about Bad
Bunny. M
>> I feel like Bad Bunny is also inviting
us to leave that stage with like some
kind of pleasure in the self and what's
possible, you know,
>> and and even though he kind of darkens
it as we talked about like there there's
something kind of like irrefutable and
irreducible about the pleasure that he
is taking and offering.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I agree. I agree.
>> And that is protest too. Sasha,
thanks for coming back.
>> Thank you for having me.
>> We did it again.
>> Gracias.
Gracias.